---
path: "/ff05/bayeshead-5000"
title: "BayesHead 5000"
report: "ff05"
report_title: "Probabilistic Programming"
preview_image: "./monte_carlo.png"
background: "#51ae75"
author: "Liam Sweeney"
author_link: "https://t.co/1ybyMuIsqv"
prologue: 'inspired by George Saunder’s ["I Can
Speak"](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1999/06/21/i-can-speak)'
report_sentence: 'In this report we show how to use probabilistic programming to
build products and tools for more effective decision making.'
---

![](./monte_carlo.png)

Re: Inquiry on Limitations of the BayesHead 5000

Dear Mr. Jim,

We here at Monte Carlo Inc. are reaching out in response to your inquiry
dated September 15. We want you to know that we appreciate your
business. You are a valued customer and, though confused about several
aspects of our products, you strike me as a decent and intelligent
consumer. Personally, I can understand how someone without thorough
knowledge of this cutting edge technology could find themselves in the
very predicament that prompted your letter.

However, I do not mean to equivocate, Mr. Jim. We will not be
reimbursing you for the BayesHead 5000. Nor will we be covering your
costs for surgical removal. While there are several technical reasons
that we cannot accommodate your request, I believe in this particular
instance there may be value in addressing your recent error and
contextualizing our role in it. After all, what kind of corporation
would we be if we implanted our products in your inner ear canal and
then failed to address your concerns in such a time of distress\!

Firstly, I sympathize with you and all our clients who have been banned
from traditional gambling venues. Although we take great pride at Monte
Carlo Inc. in having granted our customers the almost mystical
prescience that has led to these regulations, we are pained to learn
that many customers, such as yourself, have now turned the events of
their own lives —personal disputes with loved ones, even their
health—into venues for wagering their hard earned savings. It is
perfectly understandable, given the BayesHead’s sophistication, that
those who have invested not only in the product but the “costly
operation” (as you put it), would begin to see such opportunities in
their daily lives.

But it is my feeling, Mr. Jim, that it is unwise to place bets on your
daughter’s, and her friend’s, college applications. It is especially
unwise in your situation, for a number of reasons, which I will
investigate in the remainder of this letter.

To begin, I wonder how certain you are that the other fathers in the
pool had either no BayesHead, or a version of the BayesHead older than
your own. I’m sure you are aware that we recently released the BayesHead
6000, which has some remarkable new functionality. It has, in fact,
transformed the whole landscape of probabilistic programming, rendering
your BayesHead as more of a liability, evidenced by the false sense of
security it seems to have offered you in your wager. You see, while the
BayesHead 5000 will input your assumptions and, using Bayesian
statistical analysis and advanced scraping tools, model the probable
outcomes of a given situation, the BayesHead 6000 has much more advanced
functionality. How could we possibly improve on the BayesHead 5000 you
are wondering? With the BayesHead 6000, our product has actually
inverted its process. Rather than taking your assumptions as capital t
Truth, and manipulating the data accordingly, the BayesHead 6000 treats
the available data as capital t Truth. It uses your assumptions as
inputs in its algorithm, but then uses the existing data to correct your
assumptions, in order to allow you to adjust your model and improve your
predictions.

Take, for example, the bets you and Greg placed on your daughters. There
are certain quantitative measures that are fairly standard, which don’t
require any prior assumptions: GPA, SAT score, list of extracurriculars
and foreign languages. But then there is the interview, and the personal
essay. The BayesHead needs your assumptions to measure how these
variables will impact the committee. And here you are at a great
disadvantage. Because while Greg, with the BayesHead 6000 (surely you
know by now that he has one), was able to have his opinion of his
daughter corrected with real world data taken from both her online
presence and her own BayesHead 6000 (the Wilson’s have the family plan),
your BayesHead 5000 does not have the functionality to correct your
perspective on your daughter’s charisma and intellectual curiosity.

Luckily, with an upgrade to the BayesHead 6000, you’ll no longer be in
danger of overestimating your child’s abilities. And, for a limited
time, we are offering free installation. Though, do note, as there has
been some confusion about this lately, that standard fees apply to
removal of the BayesHead 5000. In my opinion (if I may speak from
personal experience) it is actually preferable to keep the old
technology implanted, as there can be a sort of uncomfortable phantom
itch that recurs with removal.

I have to say, Mr. Jim, I do sympathize with your position, and
especially with your daughter. While we cannot accept responsibility for
your predicament, we understand your frustration that your confidence in
our product has resulted in a depletion of your daughter’s tuition fund
(although we cannot ignore the silver lining that perhaps she will
perform as you initially had hoped\! now that she has a chance for
another round of applications). That said, if it is her desire to attend
a safety school this year, I would like to refer you to the student loan
division of Monte Carlo Inc. They offer extremely reasonable interest
rates and, as I’ll let them explain, significant discounts when loans
are paired with a BayesHead upgrade.

Best Regards,  
Gary

Sales Associate  
Monte Carlo Inc.  
*Luck: It’s all in your head*
