---
path: "/ff07/customers-who-havent-read-kafka-also-like"
title: "Customers Who Haven’t Read Kafka Also Like"
report: "ff07"
report_title: "Semantic Recommendations"
preview_image: "./ff07-scifi-01.svg"
background: "#ed874f"
author: "Kent Szlauderbach"
author_link: "http://kentszlauderbach.com/"
prologue: 'inspired by Franz Kafka’s ["An Imperial Message"](http://home.nwciowa.edu/firth/kafka.htm)'
report_sentence: 'In this report we show how to use deep learning techniques to overcome the weaknesses of traditional recommendation systems.'
---

<div class="md_image full_width">

![A computer in a high-rise office buildings. Two plants surround the computer.
Its screen reads "Customers Who Haven't Read Kafka Also Like".](./ff07-scifi-01.svg)

</div>

Given that Kafka’s famous parable, “An Imperial Message,” never
happened, neither would this parable, as our model suggests, though they
are very similar. Say the most powerful computer in the nation sends a
message, in a fatal error, containing the story’s true meaning to you, a
modest user, a forensic trace represented by mere underscores bookended
by two periods, a crushed smiley at the bottom of the remotest silo in
the most isolated piece of crumbling land that can still be accessed
from the office that houses the tower, which is gleaming and made all of
windows and plants, as you can see. To its subjects the office suits the
computer’s good policy, clear thinking, and calm understanding—unlike
yours, the message’s subject. We all feel this way now and then. Better
for you, the subject, that the computer’s message, its production of
meaning after reading the famous parable, which the subject has never
read, according to the model, urgently needs to be delivered to this
subject alone, which is so rare as to be impossible, we modeled, we
thought, given that the computer was not designed to send messages so…
personal, so clearly made out to a reader. What it says is not our
business; the successful delivery of this message is: so the computer
called a little messenger over, said good boy, because you can imagine a
black dog better than a black box, and began to whisper the message that
you’ve been wanting to hear, something so urgent, perhaps for the
perfect product—no, service—the one that may have been your very idea,
the one you need now more than ever. What could it say? The computer, in
its towering form and brilliant interface, standing at the center of its
office made of windows and plants, made a command to the messenger,
which had never happened before and should never have happened, we
thought, we modeled, but still, the computer set delivery to the subject
who shall be delivered of the need to hear that message, that message
that the computer had delivered to a messenger, who we can only say is a
black box, a negative, nothing we can say, that is neither black nor a
box. The dog carried its black box in its mouth along the path below but
still in range of sight of the office made of windows and plants, then
down through an office park, where in its visible spectrum it could see
the thousands of others like him itself who had come to the office of
windows and plants to witness the fatal error of the computer, dogs
whose messages were totally unlike yours, mutually unintelligible as
they were, but had gathered there anyway to witness the message as if it
were the final move in a game, this final stroke of the task, but
instead demanded that this message go out to a single subject in the
remotest place in the country’s network, a black box through a black
box, first through the innermost room of an office park that was neither
black nor a box, to the inner city whose office park buildings were
themselves black boxes atop black boxes, but again, were neither black
nor boxes, but blue and reflective, where our messenger looked—yes this
dog vessel could look and learn itself, as we modeled, we thought. Even
if these buildings, as they appear to the messenger, are not black nor
boxes, they give the messenger, looking at itself, the feeling of a
black box, of unknowing, since he it has no idea what is contained in
this message, or how he’ll it will ever get to you and if he it ever
will, but yet he it presses on as the computer commanded, for even if
the messenger reached the edge of the city, it would still have to make
it through the suburb offices of black boxes, buildings that had grown
so tall and wide as to become indistinguishable from the inner city.
Still not lost, it would take even more power and time to deliver the
message to its recipient. We have worked very hard to understand the
impossibility of this. We’ve thought about how one could be receiving
these kinds of messages before, but only in their lack of possibility.
Pure imagination. This would never happen. And you think, waiting for
the messenger who had been given the rarest possible message ever
created: What would it say? What is the meaning of the famous parable?
You’ve been selected to read this because you are the last of a group of
people who speak this language, perhaps, or only, the last who has not
read this parable. This language is English: the subject’s recommended
language, not the original. Do you know it? Click yes or no, you think,
we thought, when it would arrive, when you would hear the ring on your
phone. Thank you. That’s what it might sound like, a sound you’d never
imagine you would hear. We’re not in the business of recommending
content, it might say. We recommend memories, that of the computer
sending you such a perfect message on your birthday. Is that all it
says? Was that the day? But still the message is far away, still walking
through the office park, even as you wait and look vaguely out the
window toward the office made of windows and plants.

